README.md, before:

# Phoenix Insight CLI

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@cephalization/phoenix-insight.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@cephalization/phoenix-insight)

A filesystem-native AI agent CLI for querying Phoenix instances using the "bash + files" paradigm inspired by [Vercel's agent architecture](https://vercel.com/blog/how-to-build-agents-with-filesystems-and-bash).

Phoenix Insight transforms your Phoenix observability data into a structured filesystem, then uses an AI agent with bash tools to analyze it through natural language queries. This approach provides transparency, flexibility, and power that traditional APIs can't match.

## Installation

```bash
# Install globally via npm
npm install -g @cephalization/phoenix-insight

# Or use with pnpm
pnpm add -g @cephalization/phoenix-insight

# Or run directly with npx
npx @cephalization/phoenix-insight "your query"
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Start interactive mode (no arguments needed)
phoenix-insight

# Query Phoenix data with natural language
phoenix-insight "What are the most common errors in the last hour?"

# Local mode with persistent storage
phoenix-insight --local "analyze trace patterns"

# Force fresh data
phoenix-insight --refresh "show me the slowest endpoints"

# Show help
phoenix-insight help
```

## How It Works

Phoenix Insight operates in three phases:

1. **Data Ingestion**: Fetches data from your Phoenix instance and creates a structured filesystem snapshot
2. **AI Analysis**: An AI agent explores the data using bash commands (cat, grep, jq, awk, etc.)
3. **Natural Language Results**: The agent synthesizes findings into clear, actionable insights

### Filesystem Structure

Phoenix data is organized into an intuitive REST-like hierarchy:

```
/phoenix/
  _context.md                       # Start here! Human-readable summary
  /projects/
    index.jsonl                     # All projects
    /{project_name}/
      metadata.json                 # Project details
      /spans/
        index.jsonl                 # Trace spans (sampled)
  /datasets/
    index.jsonl                     # All datasets
    /{dataset_name}/
      metadata.json
      examples.jsonl
  /experiments/
    index.jsonl                     # All experiments
    /{experiment_id}/
      metadata.json
      runs.jsonl
  /prompts/
    index.jsonl                     # All prompts
    /{prompt_name}/
      metadata.json
      /versions/
        /{version}.md               # Prompt templates as markdown
  /traces/                          # Fetched on-demand
    /{trace_id}/
      spans.jsonl
      metadata.json
  /_meta/
    snapshot.json                   # Snapshot metadata
```

## Execution Modes

Phoenix Insight supports two execution modes:

### Sandbox Mode (default)

Uses [just-bash](https://github.com/vercel-labs/just-bash) for complete isolation:

- **In-memory filesystem**: No disk writes
- **Simulated bash**: 50+ built-in commands
- **Zero risk**: Cannot access your system
- **Perfect for**: CI/CD, demos, safe exploration

### Local Mode (--local)

Uses real bash and persistent storage:

- **Persistent data**: Snapshots saved to `~/.phoenix-insight/`
- **Full bash power**: All system commands available
- **Incremental updates**: Only fetches new data
- **Perfect for**: Power users, complex analysis, custom tools

## Usage Examples

### Basic Queries

```bash
# Analyze errors
phoenix-insight "What types of errors are occurring most frequently?"

# Performance analysis
phoenix-insight "Find the slowest traces and identify patterns"

# Experiment comparison
phoenix-insight "Compare success rates across recent experiments"

# Dataset exploration
phoenix-insight "Show me statistics about my datasets"
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
# Connect to remote Phoenix instance
phoenix-insight "analyze traces" \
  --base-url https://phoenix.example.com \
  --api-key your-api-key

# Increase span fetch limit (default: 1000 per project)
phoenix-insight "deep trace analysis" --limit 5000

# Stream responses in real-time
phoenix-insight "complex analysis task" --stream

# Use local mode for persistent storage
phoenix-insight "experimental query" --local

# Enable observability tracing (sends traces to Phoenix)
phoenix-insight "analyze performance" --trace
```

### Interactive Mode

Start an interactive REPL session for multiple queries:

```bash
# Start interactive mode (default when no query is provided)
$ phoenix-insight

# Or explicitly with --interactive flag
$ phoenix-insight --interactive

phoenix> What projects have the most spans?
[Agent analyzes and responds...]

phoenix> Show me error patterns in the chatbot-prod project
[Agent investigates specific project...]

phoenix> px-fetch-more trace --trace-id abc123
[Agent fetches specific trace data...]

phoenix> help
[Shows available commands and tips...]

phoenix> exit
```

### Snapshot Management

Create or update snapshots separately from queries:

```bash
# Create initial snapshot
phoenix-insight snapshot

# Force refresh (ignore cache)
phoenix-insight snapshot --refresh

# Snapshot from specific Phoenix instance
phoenix-insight snapshot \
  --base-url https://phoenix.example.com \
  --api-key your-api-key

# Enable observability tracing for snapshot process
phoenix-insight snapshot --trace

# Clean up local snapshots
phoenix-insight prune

# Preview what would be deleted
phoenix-insight prune --dry-run
```

### On-Demand Data Fetching

The agent can fetch additional data during analysis:

```bash
# In your query, the agent might discover it needs more data:
"I need more spans to complete this analysis. Let me fetch them..."
px-fetch-more spans --project my-project --limit 500

# Or fetch a specific trace:
"I'll get the full trace to understand the error..."
px-fetch-more trace --trace-id abc123
```

## Configuration

Phoenix Insight uses a layered configuration system with the following priority (highest to lowest):

1. **CLI arguments** - Options passed directly to the command
2. **Environment variables** - `PHOENIX_*` environment variables
3. **Config file** - JSON file at `~/.phoenix-insight/config.json`

### Config File

On first run, Phoenix Insight automatically creates a default config file at `~/.phoenix-insight/config.json` with all default values. You can edit this file to customize your settings.

**Config file location:**

- Default: `~/.phoenix-insight/config.json`
- Override with env var: `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_CONFIG=/path/to/config.json`
- Override with CLI flag: `--config /path/to/config.json`

**Example config.json with all options:**

```json
{
  "baseUrl": "http://localhost:6006",
  "apiKey": "your-api-key",
  "limit": 1000,
  "stream": true,
  "mode": "sandbox",
  "refresh": false,
  "trace": false
}
```

| Config Key | Type                     | Default                 | Description                                   |
| ---------- | ------------------------ | ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `baseUrl`  | string                   | `http://localhost:6006` | Phoenix server URL                            |
| `apiKey`   | string                   | (none)                  | API key for authentication                    |
| `limit`    | number                   | `1000`                  | Maximum spans to fetch per project            |
| `stream`   | boolean                  | `true`                  | Enable streaming responses from the agent     |
| `mode`     | `"sandbox"` \| `"local"` | `"sandbox"`             | Execution mode                                |
| `refresh`  | boolean                  | `false`                 | Force refresh of snapshot data                |
| `trace`    | boolean                  | `false`                 | Enable tracing of agent operations to Phoenix |

### Environment Variables

| Variable                  | Config Key | Default                 | Description                |
| ------------------------- | ---------- | ----------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `PHOENIX_BASE_URL`        | `baseUrl`  | `http://localhost:6006` | Phoenix server URL         |
| `PHOENIX_API_KEY`         | `apiKey`   | (none)                  | API key for authentication |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_LIMIT`   | `limit`    | `1000`                  | Max spans per project      |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_STREAM`  | `stream`   | `true`                  | Enable streaming           |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_MODE`    | `mode`     | `sandbox`               | Execution mode             |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_REFRESH` | `refresh`  | `false`                 | Force refresh snapshot     |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_TRACE`   | `trace`    | `false`                 | Enable tracing             |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_CONFIG`  | -          | -                       | Custom config file path    |
| `DEBUG`                   | -          | `0`                     | Show detailed error info   |

### Commands

Phoenix Insight provides several commands:

- **Default (interactive mode)**: `phoenix-insight` - Start interactive REPL when no query is provided
- **Query mode**: `phoenix-insight "your query"` - Analyze Phoenix data with natural language
- **`help`**: Show help information
- **`snapshot`**: Create or update a data snapshot from Phoenix
- **`prune`**: Delete local snapshot directory to free up space

### Command Line Options

| Option                | Description                        | Default          | Applies to     |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------- | -------------- |
| `--config <path>`     | Custom config file path            | (auto-detected)  | all            |
| `--sandbox`           | Run in sandbox mode (default)      | true             | query          |
| `--local`             | Run in local mode                  | false            | query          |
| `--base-url <url>`    | Phoenix server URL                 | env or localhost | all            |
| `--api-key <key>`     | Phoenix API key                    | env or none      | all            |
| `--refresh`           | Force fresh snapshot               | false            | query/snapshot |
| `--limit <n>`         | Max spans per project              | 1000             | query          |
| `--stream`            | Stream agent responses             | true             | query          |
| `--interactive`, `-i` | Interactive REPL mode              | false            | query          |
| `--trace`             | Enable tracing to Phoenix instance | false            | query/snapshot |
| `--dry-run`           | Preview without making changes     | false            | prune          |

### Local Mode Storage

In local mode, data is stored in:

```
~/.phoenix-insight/
  config.json                  # Configuration (auto-created on first run)
  /snapshots/
    /{timestamp}/              # Each snapshot
      /phoenix/                # Phoenix data
  /cache/                      # API response cache
```

To clean up local storage:

```bash
# Delete all local snapshots
phoenix-insight prune

# Preview what will be deleted
phoenix-insight prune --dry-run
```

## Troubleshooting

For connection issues, authentication errors, debug mode, and common issues, see the [Troubleshooting Guide](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md).

## Observability

Phoenix Insight can trace its own execution back to Phoenix for monitoring and debugging:

```bash
# Enable tracing for queries
phoenix-insight "analyze errors" --trace

# Enable tracing in interactive mode
phoenix-insight --interactive --trace

# Enable tracing for snapshot creation
phoenix-insight snapshot --trace
```

When `--trace` is enabled:

- All agent operations are traced as spans
- Tool calls and responses are captured
- Performance metrics are recorded
- Traces are sent to the same Phoenix instance being queried (or the one specified by --base-url)

This is particularly useful for:

- Debugging slow queries
- Understanding agent decision-making
- Monitoring Phoenix Insight usage
- Optimizing performance

## Agent Capabilities

The AI agent has access to:

### Bash Commands (Sandbox Mode)

- **File operations**: `cat`, `ls`, `find`, `head`, `tail`
- **Search & filter**: `grep`, `awk`, `sed`
- **JSON processing**: `jq` (full featured)
- **Analysis**: `sort`, `uniq`, `wc`
- **And more**: 50+ commands via just-bash

### Bash Commands (Local Mode)

- All commands available on your system
- Custom tools: `ripgrep`, `fd`, `bat`, etc.
- Full `jq`, `awk`, `sed` features
- Any installed CLI tools

### Custom Commands

- `px-fetch-more spans`: Fetch additional spans
- `px-fetch-more trace`: Fetch specific trace by ID

### Understanding Context

The agent always starts by reading `/_context.md` which provides:

- Summary of available data
- Recent activity highlights
- Data freshness information
- Available commands reminder

## Development

### Building from Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Arize-ai/phoenix.git
cd phoenix/js/packages/phoenix-insight

# Install dependencies
pnpm install

# Run in development
pnpm dev "your query"

# Run tests
pnpm test

# Build for production
pnpm build

# Type checking
pnpm typecheck
```

### Architecture

Phoenix Insight uses:

- **Commander.js** for CLI interface
- **AI SDK** with Anthropic Claude for the agent
- **just-bash** for sandbox execution
- **Phoenix Client** for data fetching
- **TypeScript** for type safety

### Testing

```bash
# Run all tests
pnpm test

# Run with coverage
pnpm test -- --coverage

# Run specific test file
pnpm test src/modes/sandbox.test.ts

# Type checking
pnpm typecheck
```

## Examples of Agent Analysis

### Error Pattern Detection

```
User: "What are the most common errors in my traces?"

Agent: I'll analyze the error patterns in your traces. Let me start by examining the context...

*reads _context.md*
*searches for error spans across projects*
*aggregates by error type*
*identifies patterns*

I found 3 main error patterns in your traces:
1. **Database timeouts** (42% of errors): Occurring in user-service, primarily during peak hours
2. **API rate limits** (31% of errors): Third-party integration hitting limits
3. **Null pointer exceptions** (27% of errors): In the recommendation engine

The database timeouts show a clear pattern during 9-10am and 2-3pm daily.
```

### Performance Analysis

```
User: "Find the slowest API endpoints"

Agent: I'll analyze your API endpoint performance. Let me examine the span data...

*reads project spans*
*calculates latency percentiles*
*groups by endpoint*
*identifies outliers*

Here are your slowest API endpoints by p95 latency:
1. `/api/v1/recommendations` - 3.2s p95 (8.1s p99)
2. `/api/v1/search` - 2.8s p95 (5.2s p99)
3. `/api/v1/user/history` - 1.9s p95 (3.1s p99)

The recommendations endpoint has high variability, suggesting cache misses.
```

## Tips and Best Practices

### Query Formulation

- Be specific about what you want to analyze
- Mention time ranges if relevant
- Ask for patterns, not just raw data

### Performance

- Use `--limit` to control data volume
- In sandbox mode, start with smaller datasets
- Use local mode for production analysis

### Security

- Use sandbox mode when trying new queries
- Never put API keys in queries
- Review agent actions with `--stream`

## Contributing & Releases

Contributions are welcome! This project uses [changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for version management and automated releases.

### Making Changes

1. Fork the repository and create a feature branch
2. Make your changes and ensure tests pass (`pnpm test`)
3. Create a changeset to document your changes:

```bash
pnpm changeset
```

4. Follow the prompts to:
   - Select the type of change (patch, minor, major)
   - Describe what changed for the changelog

5. Commit the generated changeset file along with your changes
6. Open a pull request

### Release Process

When your PR is merged to `main`:

1. If there are pending changesets, a "Version Packages" PR is automatically created
2. This PR updates the version in `package.json` and generates `CHANGELOG.md` entries
3. When the Version Packages PR is merged, the package is automatically published to npm

### Changeset Guidelines

- **patch**: Bug fixes, documentation updates, internal refactoring
- **minor**: New features, new CLI options, non-breaking enhancements
- **major**: Breaking changes to CLI interface or behavior

## Support

This software is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. Use at your own risk.

You may file GitHub issues at [https://github.com/cephalization/phoenix-insight/issues](https://github.com/cephalization/phoenix-insight/issues).


## License

Apache-2.0 - See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.

Commit message:

feat(phoenix-insight): restructure-readme-intro - rewrite intro to lead with architecture value proposition

README.md, after:

# Phoenix Insight CLI

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@cephalization/phoenix-insight.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@cephalization/phoenix-insight)

Phoenix Insight brings AI-powered analysis to your [Phoenix](https://github.com/Arize-ai/phoenix) observability data using the ["bash + files" paradigm](https://vercel.com/blog/how-to-build-agents-with-filesystems-and-bash). Instead of hiding data behind opaque API calls, Phoenix Insight materializes your traces, experiments, datasets, and prompts as a structured filesystem. An AI agent then explores this data using standard bash commands you already know: `cat`, `grep`, `jq`, `awk`, and more.

This filesystem-native approach provides transparency that traditional APIs can't match. Every query the agent runs is visible and reproducible. You can inspect the exact files it reads, copy its commands, and run them yourself. The data is just files, and the analysis is just bash, making AI-driven observability debuggable, auditable, and extensible with any tool in your Unix toolkit.

## Installation

```bash
# Install globally via npm
npm install -g @cephalization/phoenix-insight

# Or use with pnpm
pnpm add -g @cephalization/phoenix-insight

# Or run directly with npx
npx @cephalization/phoenix-insight "your query"
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Start interactive mode (no arguments needed)
phoenix-insight

# Query Phoenix data with natural language
phoenix-insight "What are the most common errors in the last hour?"

# Local mode with persistent storage
phoenix-insight --local "analyze trace patterns"

# Force fresh data
phoenix-insight --refresh "show me the slowest endpoints"

# Show help
phoenix-insight help
```

## How It Works

Phoenix Insight operates in three phases:

1. **Data Ingestion**: Fetches data from your Phoenix instance and creates a structured filesystem snapshot
2. **AI Analysis**: An AI agent explores the data using bash commands (cat, grep, jq, awk, etc.)
3. **Natural Language Results**: The agent synthesizes findings into clear, actionable insights

### Filesystem Structure

Phoenix data is organized into an intuitive REST-like hierarchy:

```
/phoenix/
  _context.md                       # Start here! Human-readable summary
  /projects/
    index.jsonl                     # All projects
    /{project_name}/
      metadata.json                 # Project details
      /spans/
        index.jsonl                 # Trace spans (sampled)
  /datasets/
    index.jsonl                     # All datasets
    /{dataset_name}/
      metadata.json
      examples.jsonl
  /experiments/
    index.jsonl                     # All experiments
    /{experiment_id}/
      metadata.json
      runs.jsonl
  /prompts/
    index.jsonl                     # All prompts
    /{prompt_name}/
      metadata.json
      /versions/
        /{version}.md               # Prompt templates as markdown
  /traces/                          # Fetched on-demand
    /{trace_id}/
      spans.jsonl
      metadata.json
  /_meta/
    snapshot.json                   # Snapshot metadata
```

## Execution Modes

Phoenix Insight supports two execution modes:

### Sandbox Mode (default)

Uses [just-bash](https://github.com/vercel-labs/just-bash) for complete isolation:

- **In-memory filesystem**: No disk writes
- **Simulated bash**: 50+ built-in commands
- **Zero risk**: Cannot access your system
- **Perfect for**: CI/CD, demos, safe exploration

### Local Mode (--local)

Uses real bash and persistent storage:

- **Persistent data**: Snapshots saved to `~/.phoenix-insight/`
- **Full bash power**: All system commands available
- **Incremental updates**: Only fetches new data
- **Perfect for**: Power users, complex analysis, custom tools

## Usage Examples

### Basic Queries

```bash
# Analyze errors
phoenix-insight "What types of errors are occurring most frequently?"

# Performance analysis
phoenix-insight "Find the slowest traces and identify patterns"

# Experiment comparison
phoenix-insight "Compare success rates across recent experiments"

# Dataset exploration
phoenix-insight "Show me statistics about my datasets"
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
# Connect to remote Phoenix instance
phoenix-insight "analyze traces" \
  --base-url https://phoenix.example.com \
  --api-key your-api-key

# Increase span fetch limit (default: 1000 per project)
phoenix-insight "deep trace analysis" --limit 5000

# Stream responses in real-time
phoenix-insight "complex analysis task" --stream

# Use local mode for persistent storage
phoenix-insight "experimental query" --local

# Enable observability tracing (sends traces to Phoenix)
phoenix-insight "analyze performance" --trace
```

### Interactive Mode

Start an interactive REPL session for multiple queries:

```bash
# Start interactive mode (default when no query is provided)
$ phoenix-insight

# Or explicitly with --interactive flag
$ phoenix-insight --interactive

phoenix> What projects have the most spans?
[Agent analyzes and responds...]

phoenix> Show me error patterns in the chatbot-prod project
[Agent investigates specific project...]

phoenix> px-fetch-more trace --trace-id abc123
[Agent fetches specific trace data...]

phoenix> help
[Shows available commands and tips...]

phoenix> exit
```

### Snapshot Management

Create or update snapshots separately from queries:

```bash
# Create initial snapshot
phoenix-insight snapshot

# Force refresh (ignore cache)
phoenix-insight snapshot --refresh

# Snapshot from specific Phoenix instance
phoenix-insight snapshot \
  --base-url https://phoenix.example.com \
  --api-key your-api-key

# Enable observability tracing for snapshot process
phoenix-insight snapshot --trace

# Clean up local snapshots
phoenix-insight prune

# Preview what would be deleted
phoenix-insight prune --dry-run
```

### On-Demand Data Fetching

The agent can fetch additional data during analysis:

```bash
# In your query, the agent might discover it needs more data:
"I need more spans to complete this analysis. Let me fetch them..."
px-fetch-more spans --project my-project --limit 500

# Or fetch a specific trace:
"I'll get the full trace to understand the error..."
px-fetch-more trace --trace-id abc123
```

## Configuration

Phoenix Insight uses a layered configuration system with the following priority (highest to lowest):

1. **CLI arguments** - Options passed directly to the command
2. **Environment variables** - `PHOENIX_*` environment variables
3. **Config file** - JSON file at `~/.phoenix-insight/config.json`

### Config File

On first run, Phoenix Insight automatically creates a default config file at `~/.phoenix-insight/config.json` with all default values. You can edit this file to customize your settings.

**Config file location:**

- Default: `~/.phoenix-insight/config.json`
- Override with env var: `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_CONFIG=/path/to/config.json`
- Override with CLI flag: `--config /path/to/config.json`

**Example config.json with all options:**

```json
{
  "baseUrl": "http://localhost:6006",
  "apiKey": "your-api-key",
  "limit": 1000,
  "stream": true,
  "mode": "sandbox",
  "refresh": false,
  "trace": false
}
```

| Config Key | Type                     | Default                 | Description                                   |
| ---------- | ------------------------ | ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `baseUrl`  | string                   | `http://localhost:6006` | Phoenix server URL                            |
| `apiKey`   | string                   | (none)                  | API key for authentication                    |
| `limit`    | number                   | `1000`                  | Maximum spans to fetch per project            |
| `stream`   | boolean                  | `true`                  | Enable streaming responses from the agent     |
| `mode`     | `"sandbox"` \| `"local"` | `"sandbox"`             | Execution mode                                |
| `refresh`  | boolean                  | `false`                 | Force refresh of snapshot data                |
| `trace`    | boolean                  | `false`                 | Enable tracing of agent operations to Phoenix |

### Environment Variables

| Variable                  | Config Key | Default                 | Description                |
| ------------------------- | ---------- | ----------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `PHOENIX_BASE_URL`        | `baseUrl`  | `http://localhost:6006` | Phoenix server URL         |
| `PHOENIX_API_KEY`         | `apiKey`   | (none)                  | API key for authentication |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_LIMIT`   | `limit`    | `1000`                  | Max spans per project      |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_STREAM`  | `stream`   | `true`                  | Enable streaming           |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_MODE`    | `mode`     | `sandbox`               | Execution mode             |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_REFRESH` | `refresh`  | `false`                 | Force refresh snapshot     |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_TRACE`   | `trace`    | `false`                 | Enable tracing             |
| `PHOENIX_INSIGHT_CONFIG`  | -          | -                       | Custom config file path    |
| `DEBUG`                   | -          | `0`                     | Show detailed error info   |

### Commands

Phoenix Insight provides several commands:

- **Default (interactive mode)**: `phoenix-insight` - Start interactive REPL when no query is provided
- **Query mode**: `phoenix-insight "your query"` - Analyze Phoenix data with natural language
- **`help`**: Show help information
- **`snapshot`**: Create or update a data snapshot from Phoenix
- **`prune`**: Delete local snapshot directory to free up space

### Command Line Options

| Option                | Description                        | Default          | Applies to     |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------- | -------------- |
| `--config <path>`     | Custom config file path            | (auto-detected)  | all            |
| `--sandbox`           | Run in sandbox mode (default)      | true             | query          |
| `--local`             | Run in local mode                  | false            | query          |
| `--base-url <url>`    | Phoenix server URL                 | env or localhost | all            |
| `--api-key <key>`     | Phoenix API key                    | env or none      | all            |
| `--refresh`           | Force fresh snapshot               | false            | query/snapshot |
| `--limit <n>`         | Max spans per project              | 1000             | query          |
| `--stream`            | Stream agent responses             | true             | query          |
| `--interactive`, `-i` | Interactive REPL mode              | false            | query          |
| `--trace`             | Enable tracing to Phoenix instance | false            | query/snapshot |
| `--dry-run`           | Preview without making changes     | false            | prune          |

### Local Mode Storage

In local mode, data is stored in:

```
~/.phoenix-insight/
  config.json                  # Configuration (auto-created on first run)
  /snapshots/
    /{timestamp}/              # Each snapshot
      /phoenix/                # Phoenix data
  /cache/                      # API response cache
```

To clean up local storage:

```bash
# Delete all local snapshots
phoenix-insight prune

# Preview what will be deleted
phoenix-insight prune --dry-run
```

## Troubleshooting

For connection issues, authentication errors, debug mode, and common issues, see the [Troubleshooting Guide](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md).

## Observability

Phoenix Insight can trace its own execution back to Phoenix for monitoring and debugging:

```bash
# Enable tracing for queries
phoenix-insight "analyze errors" --trace

# Enable tracing in interactive mode
phoenix-insight --interactive --trace

# Enable tracing for snapshot creation
phoenix-insight snapshot --trace
```

When `--trace` is enabled:

- All agent operations are traced as spans
- Tool calls and responses are captured
- Performance metrics are recorded
- Traces are sent to the same Phoenix instance being queried (or the one specified by --base-url)

This is particularly useful for:

- Debugging slow queries
- Understanding agent decision-making
- Monitoring Phoenix Insight usage
- Optimizing performance

## Agent Capabilities

The AI agent has access to:

### Bash Commands (Sandbox Mode)

- **File operations**: `cat`, `ls`, `find`, `head`, `tail`
- **Search & filter**: `grep`, `awk`, `sed`
- **JSON processing**: `jq` (full featured)
- **Analysis**: `sort`, `uniq`, `wc`
- **And more**: 50+ commands via just-bash

### Bash Commands (Local Mode)

- All commands available on your system
- Custom tools: `ripgrep`, `fd`, `bat`, etc.
- Full `jq`, `awk`, `sed` features
- Any installed CLI tools

### Custom Commands

- `px-fetch-more spans`: Fetch additional spans
- `px-fetch-more trace`: Fetch specific trace by ID

### Understanding Context

The agent always starts by reading `/_context.md` which provides:

- Summary of available data
- Recent activity highlights
- Data freshness information
- Available commands reminder

## Development

### Building from Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Arize-ai/phoenix.git
cd phoenix/js/packages/phoenix-insight

# Install dependencies
pnpm install

# Run in development
pnpm dev "your query"

# Run tests
pnpm test

# Build for production
pnpm build

# Type checking
pnpm typecheck
```

### Architecture

Phoenix Insight uses:

- **Commander.js** for CLI interface
- **AI SDK** with Anthropic Claude for the agent
- **just-bash** for sandbox execution
- **Phoenix Client** for data fetching
- **TypeScript** for type safety

### Testing

```bash
# Run all tests
pnpm test

# Run with coverage
pnpm test -- --coverage

# Run specific test file
pnpm test src/modes/sandbox.test.ts

# Type checking
pnpm typecheck
```

## Examples of Agent Analysis

### Error Pattern Detection

```
User: "What are the most common errors in my traces?"

Agent: I'll analyze the error patterns in your traces. Let me start by examining the context...

*reads _context.md*
*searches for error spans across projects*
*aggregates by error type*
*identifies patterns*

I found 3 main error patterns in your traces:
1. **Database timeouts** (42% of errors): Occurring in user-service, primarily during peak hours
2. **API rate limits** (31% of errors): Third-party integration hitting limits
3. **Null pointer exceptions** (27% of errors): In the recommendation engine

The database timeouts show a clear pattern during 9-10am and 2-3pm daily.
```

### Performance Analysis

```
User: "Find the slowest API endpoints"

Agent: I'll analyze your API endpoint performance. Let me examine the span data...

*reads project spans*
*calculates latency percentiles*
*groups by endpoint*
*identifies outliers*

Here are your slowest API endpoints by p95 latency:
1. `/api/v1/recommendations` - 3.2s p95 (8.1s p99)
2. `/api/v1/search` - 2.8s p95 (5.2s p99)
3. `/api/v1/user/history` - 1.9s p95 (3.1s p99)

The recommendations endpoint has high variability, suggesting cache misses.
```

## Tips and Best Practices

### Query Formulation

- Be specific about what you want to analyze
- Mention time ranges if relevant
- Ask for patterns, not just raw data

### Performance

- Use `--limit` to control data volume
- In sandbox mode, start with smaller datasets
- Use local mode for production analysis

### Security

- Use sandbox mode when trying new queries
- Never put API keys in queries
- Review agent actions with `--stream`

## Contributing & Releases

Contributions are welcome! This project uses [changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for version management and automated releases.

### Making Changes

1. Fork the repository and create a feature branch
2. Make your changes and ensure tests pass (`pnpm test`)
3. Create a changeset to document your changes:

```bash
pnpm changeset
```

4. Follow the prompts to:
   - Select the type of change (patch, minor, major)
   - Describe what changed for the changelog

5. Commit the generated changeset file along with your changes
6. Open a pull request

### Release Process

When your PR is merged to `main`:

1. If there are pending changesets, a "Version Packages" PR is automatically created
2. This PR updates the version in `package.json` and generates `CHANGELOG.md` entries
3. When the Version Packages PR is merged, the package is automatically published to npm

### Changeset Guidelines

- **patch**: Bug fixes, documentation updates, internal refactoring
- **minor**: New features, new CLI options, non-breaking enhancements
- **major**: Breaking changes to CLI interface or behavior

## Support

This software is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. Use at your own risk.

You may file GitHub issues at [https://github.com/cephalization/phoenix-insight/issues](https://github.com/cephalization/phoenix-insight/issues).


## License

Apache-2.0 - See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.
